[DOCS-14136] Add Remote Actions toolset (Preview) to MCP server docs (#36751)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/agent/guide/rshell.md

---
title: Agent Restricted Shell (rshell)
kind: documentation
---

## Overview

> The Agent Restricted Shell (rshell) is the command execution layer behind the `agent` toolset in the Datadog MCP server. When an AI system or developer CLI calls `datadog_remote_action_restricted_shell_run_command`, rshell is what runs on the host.

Reviewer: Why are we calling this the `agent` toolset? Did something change? This MCP tool lives under the `remote-actions` toolset, see https://github.com/DataDog/dd-source/blob/main/domains/mcp_services/libs/go/mcp/tools/remote_actions/tool_run_shell.go

rshell is an open source, POSIX-compatible shell interpreter written in Go and embedded in the Private Action Runner (PAR) process. It is not a real host shell. There is no `bash`, `sh`, or `zsh` process spawned. Every command is a purpose-built Go implementation with explicit safety constraints. You can view the source at [github.com/DataDog/rshell](https://github.com/DataDog/rshell).

## How it works

When a command is invoked:

1. The Datadog backend receives the request from the MCP client.
2. The backend validates the command against the per-Agent-version allowlist.
3. The request is forwarded to the PAR running on the target host.
4. rshell, embedded in the PAR process, executes the command as a Go builtin.

> 5. Output is returned to the backend and surfaced to the MCP client.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The Datadog backend receives the request from the MCP client.
2. The request is forwarded to the PAR running on the target host.
3. rshell, embedded in the PAR process, executes the command as a Go builtin.
4. Output is returned to the backend and surfaced to the MCP client.
```

I would suggest removing:
> 2. The backend validates the command against the per-Agent-version allowlist.

I think it's too internal implementation detail and might change.

- **No external binary execution.** rshell cannot call binaries on the host. Every command is a Go builtin inside the PAR process. External commands are blocked unless an explicit ExecHandler is configured.
- **No network egress.** Network diagnostic commands (`ping`, `ss`, `ip`) are read-only. `ping` blocks flood mode, broadcast, and multicast addresses. Background execution (`cmd &`) is not supported.
- **Path allowlisting.** All file access is restricted to directories configured in `AllowedPaths`. You can further restrict this in your Agent configuration.
- **Backend-controlled command allowlist.** The permitted command set is controlled per Agent version from the Datadog backend, using a `rshell:` namespace prefix (for example, `rshell:cat`). Individual commands have a killswitch that can be disabled immediately if a security issue is discovered.
- **Empty environment by default.** No parent environment variables are inherited. rshell starts with an empty environment unless variables are explicitly passed by the caller.

> ## Supported commands

Reviewer 2: Since we mapping the features/commands to Agent 7.79, shall we indicate that?

- `>/dev/null`, `2>/dev/null`, `&>/dev/null` discard output
- `2>&1`, `>&2` file descriptor duplication between stdout and stderr
- `<<DELIM` and `<<-DELIM` heredocs

Write redirections to any target other than `/dev/null` are blocked.

### Variables and expansion

- Variable assignment: `VAR=value`
- Variable expansion: `$VAR`, `${VAR}`
- `$?` last exit code
- Inline assignment: `VAR=value command` (scoped to that command)
- Command substitution: `$(cmd)` and `` `cmd` ``; output capped at 1 MiB
- Single and double quotes
- Globbing: `*`, `?`, `[abc]`, `[a-z]`, `[!a]`
- Line continuation: `\` at end of line
- Comments: `# text`

Arithmetic expansion `$(( ))`, array assignment, append assignment (`+=`), and parameter expansion operations such as `${var:-default}` are not supported.

## Restrict file access

By default, file read commands are gated by a path allowlist managed from the Datadog backend. You can further restrict which paths rshell can access in your Agent configuration.

```yaml
# datadog.yaml
remote_configuration:
  # tk: confirm exact config key with engineering
  restricted_shell:
    allowed_paths:
      - /etc/datadog-agent/
      - /var/log/datadog/

> ```

Reviewer 2: The rshell allowed paths config current lives in datadog.yaml here, example:

```
private_action_runner:
  enabled: true
  self_enroll: true
  actions_allowlist: [
      # ...
      "com.datadoghq.remoteaction.rshell.runCommand",
  ]
  restricted_shell_allowed_paths: [
    "/opt/datadog-agent/logs"
  ]
```

Reviewer: Note that the exact settings names in `datadog.yaml` are:
1. `private_action_runner.restricted_shell.allowed_paths`
2. `private_action_runner.restricted_shell.allowed_commands`

---
title: Agent Restricted Shell (rshell)
description: "Learn how the Agent Restricted Shell (rshell) executes safe, read-only commands on hosts through the Datadog MCP Server."
further_reading:
- link: "bits_ai/mcp_server/tools/#remote-actions"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Remote Actions toolset"
  tag: "Documentation"

>   text: "Agent toolset"

Author: ```suggestion
```
